In this section,
we're going to talk
about bits, bytes,
and endianness.
We're going to talk about how
data is laid out on disk,
how your tools are reading
that data to give you the
results that they do,
and how we would go
look at that data in
its native format to
validate our tools.
Our core concepts, what
we want to understand,
is we want to understand that how
the data is stored on the disk.
We want to be able to recognize
data and data patterns.
We want to understand how
the operating system interprets
this data and shows it to us.
We want to be able to read
the data like I said,
the way it is stored on
disk so we can interpret it
the way that our tools would.
What I want you to
come away with,
the learning objectives are,
I want you to understand
the different numbering
systems that we're going to
use in computer forensics,
computer science.
We're going to talk
about decimal,
which we all know decimal,
that's the one we use every day.
That's a base 10
numbering system.
We have our ones column,
our tens column, our
hundreds column, our
thousand column.
We're going to talk about binary,
which is a base 2
numbering system,
which would be one,
and then 2, 4, 8, 16,
continuing down the line,
and we're going to talk
about hexadecimal,
which is a base 16 numbering
system, which goes 0,
16, 32, 64, 128, etc.
We're also going to talk about
endianness, big-endian
versus little-endian.
This talks about how we
read the data on the disk,
which direction, left to
right or right to left.
We're going to talk
about signed integers,
and this is how we
get negative numbers.
We're going to talk about
hexadecimal and how to convert
it to a decimal number
or a binary number.
We're going to talk
about pact bytes,
we're going to talk about
bits, bytes, and nybbles.
We're going to talk about
flags, file attributes,
registry values,
dates, and times.
Our first module,
we're going to talk
about converting
decimal to binary.
What is binary?
Binary is actually how the
data is stored on your disk.
Your data is not stored
in hex on the hard drive,
it is stored in binary.
In binary we only have
two possible values,
a one or a zero,
there's nothing else.
Bit is one binary digit.
A nybble is four
bits or half a byte.
Because there's eight
bits in a byte.
A nybble has a
possibility of 16 values.
A byte, I just gave it
away is eight bits,
and that has 256 possible values.
Two bytes is called a word,
and that has 16 bits,
two bytes, and that has
65,536 possible values.
You see how the more
bits and bytes we have,
the more possible values we have.
Next, we have what's called
the double word or dword.
This is four bytes long,
which means it's 8 times 4 is 32,
so it's 32 bits.
You could see on
the screen it has
quite a large number
of possible values.
Next, we go up to what's
called a quadword.
A quadword is 64 bits.
A quadword is eight bytes long.
It's a quadruple word,
so it's double a double word.
Instead of four bytes,
it has eight bytes.
You can see as the number
of bytes we have go up,
the possible values go up.
This would be one reason
why you want to have
at least an eight-digit password.
Because it would be a
lot harder to crack that
many possible values than
say if you had a
four-digit password.
You can see the drastic change in
possible values you have
from dword to qword.
Now, we talked about decimal
being a base 10 numbering system.
On the screen, you can see
we have our ones, tens,
hundreds, thousands,
ten thousands, hundred
thousands column.
Binary is a base 2
numbering system.
Again, only two
choices on or off.
With that same number, 11,111,
you can see it there
represented in decimal base 10,
we can see it down below
represented in binary.
Converting the decimal
number 95 to binary.
The first thing we
would have to do
is we would write out
our column values.
Again, we would
need eight columns,
eight bits in a byte.
We have our ones our twos,
our fours, our eights,
our 16s, our 32s,
our 64s, and our 128s.
Now, the next thing
you would have to
do is you would take
the highest column value
that will go into the number
we're trying to convert.
In this case, it is 95,
so 128 will not go into 95,
so we would put a zero
in the 128 column.
Sixty-four will go into 95,
so we would put a one there.
We would then
subtract 64 from 95,
which would give us
a remainder of 31.
Thirty-two cannot go into
31 so we put a zero
in the 32 column.
Sixteen will go into 31,
so we would put a one in
that column, and again,
we would subtract 16 from 31.
When we subtract 16 from 31,
we get a remainder of 15.
Eight will go into 15,
so we would put a one
in the eight-column,
and then we would go ahead and
subtract and we get a
remainder of seven.
Four will go into seven
so we would put a one
in the fours column.
Again we would subtract 4 from 7,
which would give us a
remainder of three.
Two will go into three with
a remainder of one and
one will go into one.
Now, once we have all our
values in our columns,
we would add those numbers up.
Every column with a
one we would add.
We add 64 plus 16, plus 8,
plus 4, plus 2,
plus 1, which gives
us a total of 95.
In our next module, Module 2,
we're going to talk about
converting binary to hexadecimal.